Welcome! In this lecture we are going to be looking at how we can set the
ball to spawn behind our camera, to be a little bit more realistic for a basketball game.
And we're also going to be looking at how we can allow the
designer to tweak things like Ball Speed
at game play time, so that they can really do some game play tweaking,
as we can see here. At the same time, we're going to do a little bit of a refactor
to just clean things up. OK, see you in there!
So the balls that we have currently spawning seems to be
spawned in a little bit of a weird way. This is not at all how a basketball
game works, we should be really launching the balls from where our
camera is. So we need to find a way to
set the location of those spawned objects, so I'm going to go into
our camera Ball
Spawner script and just show you how I
can update the location of this instance. Now, I'm going to do it
for the forward direction, so the UpArrow,
so just to show you one example.
So what we can do is, with this GameObject,
we can get hold of its transform, and obviously, the transform
has a position field and we can set this
position field from the position of this current script object
transform or rather the GameObject this script is on, get the transform
of that. So let's just remind ourselves what script, what
GameObject is this script on. It's not on the Player
but it is on the Camera. If we go down in the Inspector to
the bottom, we have a Ball Spawner (Script).
OK, so we'd be getting the camera location, which is fine, that is where we want
to, indeed, either that position or the player position would be exactly the same.
So a quick reminder, at this point! Transform, when written like this without
anything before the dot operator, what this means
is we're getting the transform of the current script, and
we know that the transform of the current script is actually just
short form for getting the component transform. So it's getting the
transform of the currently attached GameObject, which in this case
is the Camera.
So we can do a tranform.position
with this script, and that is going to
essentailly set the new instance's location to being just behind
or just at this camera, and also, we carry on giving it
this forward velocity, so everything is fine
if we hit play and try that out! So
using my Up Arrow, I am going to fire this
ball from my location and you'll see all the other ones still do the same thing, but
now, that ball is actually firing from behind me.
Perfect! Now just one more thing!
I don't want to be firing the ball using the Arrow Keys, that's not a very
intuitive way to play this game, we want to be doing it using a
key press. So let's see what's available to us! If we go into Edit, Project
Settings, and Input, we can see the different axes available
to us! We've used Mouse X and Mouse Y
before, to give us contiuous input, but now we want
essentially a boolean, just a fire event. And
fortunately, there are already some Fire events here! So if we open that first Fire
event, we'll notice that we could either use the left control
or we can use the mouse down button. So both of these would be
fine! Now, because it's a boolean event, what we
can do, instead of doing a get Input.GetAxis,
is we can do an Input.GetKeyDown, which is exactly what
we've got here. But instead of passing in a KeyCode, we pass
in the name of the event or the name of the axis which is ("Fire1").
So it's a bit confusing, because in the Editor here we call them axes,
but we can do it both with a GetAxis or a GetKeyDown
and GetKeyDown just returns a boolean. So that is what we're going
to go for! So I've changed that one to fire, so that
we can fire using a mouse
down, but it
does appear to not like that, saying that this key name
is unknown.
And that's because I wasn't quite right in
saying that we would Get a Key Down. We need to GetButton
Down, and that is more general, that is general to taking in
an axis name instead of a key name. So if we hit
play again, this time it doesn't complain, and if I click,
it does launch the balls as it should.
So the name of this BallSpawner script is starting to make less
sense now. I'd like you to refactor this BallSpawner script, that means we're going to
iteratively improve and improve the legibility of the code
and so on. So the way I would like you to go about doing this
is, create a new script called BallLauncher. It's going to have a fraction of the functionality,
we're not going to do all the Arrow Keys and stuff like that. And then, I would like
you to handle only the Fire1 event in this script,
as we have done in the BallSpawner script. I'd
want it to set the location, as we're doing, give the ball a
forward velocity, and as a bonus,
if you can expose that forward velocity to the designer, try and
see if you can rack your brains and figure out how you might do that. But remember,
it's just a bonus, if you can't manage it don't worry! OK, so
pause the video and have a go at this now!
OK, welcome back! We're going to dive right in and have a go at
this refactor ourselves! OK, so I'm going to pause
the playing execution, and I'm going to, first off, create this new
script. So right-click in the Scripts folder, Create, C# Script,
and we're going to do a BallLauncher, instead.
That's a much better name for what this is doing, it's not really a BallSpawner,
the spawner just doesn't tell us where it's going, whereas Launch
here is quite clearly more about what we're
all about. Now don't forget you need to drag this script, either onto the
Main Camera or the Player. I'm going to use the Player, because I think that's a more logical place for the
ball launcher to live, and let's open that C#
script! OK, now I'm going to copy and
paste this section of code. I'm going to take just the if, without the
else, because we aren't going to have any other conditions, and I'm going to copy
this into our BallLauncher Update () method, like so.
I'm going to save that! Now it's complaining, because
we don't have the Prefab defined, nor do we have the speed
defined. And this is where we're going to copy over
this ballPrefab field, we're going to copy that
and go to the top of our launcher and past it in here.
OK hit Save! And then, it's complaining about the
speed, so I could just declare a variable out here,
but if I declare the variable as being public
and of type float, which it is,
and I call it ballSpeed because that's a better
name, more descriptive for what it is, and I can give it a default
value here. So what's going to happen now is, if
I just rename speed here to ballSpeed as well,
for consistancy, but if I go into the Unity Editor and
I look at my player with the Ball Launcher component, you'll notice the Ball
Speed has appeared in here and I can now drag that and
change it, as a designer. So I don't need to know code, in order
to change the speed at which the ball is launched, which would be quite useful if we were doing
multiple levels for this game.
So let's have a look and preview whether
this works! I'm going to hit play
and OK, we are getting an error straight away here,
and the reason for this error is that we haven't assigned our prefab.
So I'm going to stop playing, open up
our Prefabs folder, select the Player in the Hierarchy,
and drag the basketball onto the Prefab field.
I'm going to hit Save so my scene doesn't get lost,
and hit play! OK, now we are launching
balls, but you notice there are two balls in the scene, which is a
little bit odd. Now why is that? The reason for
that is that we haven't removed our BallSpawner script
that was previously on the Camera. So if we scroll down,
in the Inspector, on the Camera
and just normal click the cog and Remove Component, going to hit save
play, and now we just get
the one ball. If I right-click to minimize
my tab, then I want to show you the power
of live editing in Unity. I can actually tweak
the speed of this ball, let's make it something very noticable, like 100,
right during game play, and now if I fire, you can
see my ball's start off with a great deal more velocity
than they did before. And so that is the power of being able to
tweak these properties right in the Editor. You can really do a
lot for the game play and for your designer, by exposing your properties
in this way. OK, so the final step of refactoring
is just to remove that old script that we no longer want. So
that BallSpawner, we're going to right-click and hit Delete.
Now, I'm going to Save and
hit play, check I haven't deleted anything that was actually necessary.
You'll notice the speed has gone back to normal, that is the nature of changing these
fields during edit time, is that it is just during edit time you have to
copy those values back, if you want them to persist beyond
that first run. OK, so we've covered a few concepts
here about exposing things to the Editor, and also
we have got our balls spawning, in the right location, and done a refactor.
Congratulations! Let's move on to the next lecture!